---
layout: archive
title: "Working Papers"
permalink: /active/
author_profile: true
---

Under Review
------
<h3>(Review Article) The dark energy of cancer: Metabolic insights into tumor evolution and therapy</h3>
<i>Co-Authored with Ching-Feng Chiu, Jonathan Jaime G. Guerrero, Cidne Danielle D. Carles, Paolo C. Encarnacion, Edrian M. Octavo, Dan Christopher I. Limbaroc, Jiayan Zhou, Kin Israel R. Notarte & Charupong Saengboonmee</i><br>

<b>Abstract:</b> Cancer remains a formidable global health challenge, characterized not just by uncontrolled cell proliferation but also by the complex metabolic reprogramming that underlies its development and progression. The review delves into the intricate relationship between cancer and its metabolic alterations, drawing an innovative comparison to the cosmological concepts of dark matter and dark energy to highlight the pivotal yet often overlooked role of metabolic reprogramming in tumor evolution. It scrutinizes the Warburg effect and other metabolic adaptations, such as shifts in lipid synthesis, amino acid turnover, and mitochondrial function, driven by mutations in key regulatory genes. This metaphorical approach sheds light on the hidden dimensions of cancer cell metabolism, offering a fresh perspective on the elusive forces that fuel cancer progression, much like dark matter and dark energy's influence on the universe. The review emphasizes the significance of targeting these metabolic pathways for therapeutic intervention, outlining the potential to disrupt cancer's energy supply and signaling mechanisms. It calls for an interdisciplinary research approach to fully understand and exploit the intricacies of cancer metabolism, pointing towards metabolic reprogramming as a promising frontier for developing more effective cancer treatments. By equating cancer's metabolic complexity with the enigmatic nature of dark matter and energy, this review underscores the critical need for innovative strategies in oncology, highlighting the importance of unveiling and targeting the "dark energy" within cancer cells to revolutionize future therapy and research.<br>

<i>Keywords: cancer, cosmos, dark energy, dark matter, metabolic reprogramming, Warburg effect</i><br>

<hr class="solid" style="border-top: 1px solid gainsboro">

<h3>(Review Article) Medicines in medicines: A review of the developments and prospects of fungal endophytes in drug discovery in Southeast Asia</h3>
<i>Co-Authored with Jonathan Jaime G. Guerrero, Krizler C. Tanalgo, Angelo R. Agduma, Mario A. Tan, Marielle D. Buiza, Daniel Ellis D. Co, Mel Valerie C. Ordinario, Jobert D.L.T. Alpe, Fahrul Huyop & Kin Israel R. Notarte</i><br>
<br>
<b>Abstract:</b> Fungal endophytes engage in a balanced symbiotic continuum with their host plants, spanning from mutualism to commensalism and parasitism. These host-endophyte interactions play a pivotal role in shaping the biosynthetic and chemical space of the host plants and their associated mycobiomes, resulting in a wealth of biologically active natural products that are attractive for drug discovery. Recently, endophytic fungi in medicinal plants have gained unequivocal attention, highlighting a holistic view of plant-based therapeutics that considers both the plant and its endophytic partners as sources of medicinal compounds — a concept we termed <i>"medicine within medicine."</i> In this review, we assembled recent studies from Southeast Asia related to fungal endophytes from plants with traditional medicinal uses and their potential biomedical applications. Here, we present a comprehensive analysis of the interactions within the region, identifying prolific fungal classes that produce compounds of biomedical significance. This analysis is based on a consolidated dataset of over 1,300 interactions. Additionally, we note a correlation between plant-endophyte synthesized compounds and their related chemistry. We conclude by highlighting gaps and key limitations in the current literature, suggesting areas for future research in endophyte biology in the region.<br>

<i>Keywords: fungi, endophyte, medicinal plants, host-endophyte interaction, Southeast Asia</i><br>

Works in Progress
----
<h3>(Masters' Thesis) Metagenomic analysis of citrate treatment to microbial community and their xenometabolic functions in electrokinetic remediation of copper contaminated soil</h3>
<br>
<b>Abstract:</b> Mining operations generate substantial tons of mine tailings, characterized as mining wastes, during metal extraction processes. In the Philippines, several sites have been identified with soil heavy metal concentrations surpassing environmental quality standards, posing risks to ecosystems, food safety, and overall soil health. Microorganisms play a crucial role in preserving soil composition and mediating metal recycling processes. Exploring metal-resistant microorganisms within mining environments holds substantial promise for soil remediation and subsequent reclamation efforts. In this area, metagenomics has emerged as a powerful tool for studying microbial biodiversity, evolution, and their resilience to environmental challenge. The present work is designed to investigate the effect of citrate (C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>8</sub>O<sub>7</sub>) on the microbial diversity in mine tailings and its potential impact on pedogenesis. Shotgun, 16S, and ITS metagenomic based strategies are used to (a) characterize the microbial communities dwelling in a nutrient-poor environment, and (b) infer the metabolic potential in that environment. In this present work, the author aims to investigate the diversity of microbes (bacteria and fungi) of a copper contaminated tailing storage facility and infer their metabolic potential using metagenomics and taxonomy-based inference. The approach is conducted in a electrokinetic soil microcosm setup treated with citrate, an environmentally-friendly solvent that has been shown to effectively remove heavy metals from contaminated soils and serves as a readily available carbon source, potentially enhancing nutrient availability for microorganisms. The results of the study may offer insights into how citrate impacts the dynamics of microbial community structure in electrokinetically-remediated soil, highlighting its potential usefulness in augmenting microbial remediation processes. The analysis of extreme environments, such as those found in heavy metal-polluted sites, holds significant scientific interest due to their rich ecological diversity. These environments offer a unique opportunity to elucidate mechanisms that underlie resistance exhibited by microorganisms, and their roles in the overall biogeochemical cycling of heavy metals.<br>

<i>Keywords: metagenomics, mine tailings, microbial diversity, bioremediation, citrate</i><br>

<h6>Note: The experiment is currently in progress. Information presented will be constantly updated to reflect new changes or developments.</h6><br>


<h3>(Review Article) From Microbes to Market: Insights into Fungal Endophytes and Their Agrobiotechnological Applications in Southeast Asia</h3>
<i>Co-Authored with Jonathan Jaime G. Guerrero, Blair Ann L. Adora, Charles A. Castro, Mheljor A. General, Jeremy Roy Augustus I. Gomez & Joanne A. Langres</i><br>
<br>
<b>Abstract:</b> Fungal endophytes are known to influence plant phenotypes and the production of valuable compounds as a result of their extensive coevolutionary relationship with their hosts. Their appeal in agriculture and biotechnology stems from their potential to revolutionize agrosystems. In Southeast Asia, where agriculture is a cornerstone of economy, leveraging fungal endophytes could significantly advance sustainable farming and regional food security. The agricultural industry is increasingly focusing on multifunctional concepts and bioprospecting the use of bioinput from endophytic microbes to ensure ecosystem stability. Bioprospecting in the context of this review provides a systematic overview of the biorational approach to harnessing beneficial fungal endophytes to ensure food security in the future. This review examines beneficial host–endophyte interactions with potential applications in agriculture (such as plant growth stimulation, adaptation to abiotic stress, and support of plant defense mechanisms) and biotechnology (including bioactive metabolites, bioremediation, and the production of biofertilizers and biopreparations). Here, we review the biodiversity and agrobiotechnological contributions of endophytic fungi in Southeast Asia over the past decade, highlighting their significance for crops, industry, and ecosystems.  To our knowledge, this work is the first substantive review focusing on host–endophyte interactions in the region within these thematic areas.<br>

<i>Keywords: fungal endophyte, agriculture, biotechnology, plant–microbe interactions, fungal ecology, bioprospecting, Southeast Asia</i><br>
